Update ERC-7007: Move to Review (#209)
ethereum/ERCs: ERCS/erc-7007.md

---
eip: 7007
title: Verifiable AI-Generated Content Token

> description: An ERC-721 extension interface for zkML/opML-based AIGC-NFTs.

Reviewer: Your description has a lot of abbreviations and probably isn't accessible for the average cryptocurrency developer. Expanding them here might be nice, but you're also limited on characters so I'll leave this up to your judgment.

This standard supports two primary types of proofs: validity proofs and fraud proofs. In practice, zkML and opML are commonly employed as the prevailing instances for these types of proofs. Developers can choose their preferred ones.

In the zkML scenario, this standard enables model owners to publish their trained model and its ZKP verifier to Ethereum. Any user can claim an input (prompt) and publish the inference task. Any node that maintains the model and the proving circuit can perform the inference and proving, and submit the output of inference and the ZK proof for the inference trace to the verifier. The user that initiates the inference task will own the output for the inference of that model and input (prompt).

> In the opML scenario, this standard enables model owners to publish their trained model to Ethereum. Any user can claim an input (prompt) and publish the inference task. Any node that maintains the model can perform the inference and submit the inference output. Other nodes can challenge this result within a predefined challenge period. At the end of the challenge period, the user can verify that they own the output for the inference of that model and prompt.

Reviewer: Not a strict requirement (and more of a suggestion) but I think an illustrative use case here would be really useful. Who might be interested in using this standard, and what kind of software system would they be building?

## Specification

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

> **Every compliant contract must implement the [ERC-7007](./eip-7007.md), [ERC-721](./eip-721.md), and [ERC-165](./eip-165.md) interfaces.**

Reviewer: When talking about interfaces by name, you can use backticks (\`ERC721\`) to indicate to the linter that you're talking about code. If you want to talk about the proposal, don't use backticks (ERC-1234)

```suggestion
**Every compliant contract must implement the `IERC7007`, [`ERC721`](./eip-721.md), and [`ERC165`](./eip-165.md) interfaces.**
```

In the opML scenario, this standard enables model owners to publish their trained model to Ethereum. Any user can claim an input (prompt) and publish the inference task. Any node that maintains the model can perform the inference and submit the inference output. Other nodes can challenge this result within a predefined challenge period. At the end of the challenge period, the user can verify that they own the output for the inference of that model and prompt.

This capability is especially beneficial for AI model authors and AI content creators seeking to capitalize on their creations. With this standard, every input prompt and its resulting content can be securely verified on the blockchain. This opens up opportunities for implementing revenue-sharing mechanisms for all AI-generated content (AIGC) NFT sales. AI model authors can now share their models without concerns that open-sourcing will diminish their financial value.

> An exmaple workflow of an [ERC-7007](./eip-7007.md)-compliant zkML AIGC NFT project is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example workflow of a zkML AIGC NFT project compliant with this proposal is as follows:
```

![ERC-7007 zkML Suggested Workflow](../assets/eip-7007/workflow.png)

There are 4 components in this workflow:
* ML model - contains weights of a pre-trained model; given an inference input, generates the output
* zkML prover - given an inference task with input and output, generates a ZK proof

> * AIGC-NFT smart contract - [ERC-7007](./eip-7007.md)-compliant contract, with full [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) functionalities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* AIGC-NFT smart contract - contract compliant with this proposal, with full [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) functionalities
```

}
```

> Optional Extension: Updatable

Reviewer: I'd recommend using a subheader for this section:

```suggestion
### Optional Extension: Updatable
```

        "aigc_data": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "A URI pointing to a resource with mime type image/* representing the asset to which this AIGC NFT represents."
        },
        "proof_type": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "validity (zkML) or fraud (opML)"
        }
    }
}
```

## Rationale

> There are many proposed uses of non-fungible tokens (NFT) that depend on AI-generated content (AIGC). While traditional AIGC-based NFT can be easily implemented under the [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) schema, NFT holders don’t have the right to choose the prompt, which is the most creative part, given a pre-defined Machine Learning model. We want to give the right of prompt creation back to the NFT holders who don't have to afford the inference cost. Therefore we propose this verifiable AIGC-NFT interface to help separate prompt from the ML inference. The ecosystem will be stronger if we have a standardized interface that allows prompt-bound NFT.

Reviewer: This chunk here definitely belongs in Motivation, because it is justifying the proposal as a whole. The stuff in your Rationale section should explain technical choices made within the EIP itself.

### Unique Token Identification

This specification sets the `tokenId` to be the hash of its corresponding `prompt`, creating a deterministic and collision-resistant way to associate tokens with their unique content generation parameters. This design decision ensures that the same prompt (which corresponds to the same AI-generated content under the same model seed) cannot be minted more than once, thereby preventing duplication and preserving the uniqueness of each NFT within the ecosystem.

### Generalization to Different Proof Types

> This specification accommodates two proof types: validity proofs for zkML and fraud proofs for opML. Function arguments in mint and verify are designed for generality, allowing for compatibility with both proof systems. Moreover, the specification includes an updatable extension that specifically serves the requirements of opML.

Reviewer: Are mint and verify function names here? If so, please enclose them in backticks (\`).

### `verify` interface

We specify a `verify` interface to enforce the correctness of `aigcData`. It is defined as a view function to reduce gas cost. `verify` SHOULD return true if and only if `aigcData` is finalized in both zkML and opML. In zkML, it MUST verify the ZK proof, i.e. `proof`; in opML, it MUST make sure that the challenging period is finalized, and that the `aigcData` is up-to-date, i.e. has been updated after finalization. Additionally, `proof` CAN be *empty* in opML.

### `mint` interface

> We specify a `mint` interface to bind the prompt and aigcData with tokenId. Notably, it acts differently in zkML and opML cases. In zkML, `mint` SHOULD make sure `verify` returns `true`. While in opML, it CAN be called before finalization. The consideration here is that, limited by the proving difficulty, zkML usually targets simple model inference tasks in practice, making it possible to provide a proof within an acceptable time frame. On the other hand, opML enables large model inference tasks, with a cost of longer confirmation time to achieve the approximate same security level. Mint until opML finalization MAY not be the best practice considering the existing optimistic protocols.

Reviewer: Same comment here, but for aigcData and tokenId:

```suggestion
We specify a `mint` interface to bind the prompt and `aigcData` with `tokenId`. Notably, it acts differently in zkML and opML cases. In zkML, `mint` SHOULD make sure `verify` returns `true`. While in opML, it CAN be called before finalization. The consideration here is that, limited by the proving difficulty, zkML usually targets simple model inference tasks in practice, making it possible to provide a proof within an acceptable time frame. On the other hand, opML enables large model inference tasks, with a cost of longer confirmation time to achieve the approximate same security level. Mint until opML finalization MAY not be the best practice considering the existing optimistic protocols.
```

> We specify a `mint` interface to bind the prompt and aigcData with tokenId. Notably, it acts differently in zkML and opML cases. In zkML, `mint` SHOULD make sure `verify` returns `true`. While in opML, it CAN be called before finalization. The consideration here is that, limited by the proving difficulty, zkML usually targets simple model inference tasks in practice, making it possible to provide a proof within an acceptable time frame. On the other hand, opML enables large model inference tasks, with a cost of longer confirmation time to achieve the approximate same security level. Mint until opML finalization MAY not be the best practice considering the existing optimistic protocols.

Reviewer: Using the ALL CAPS keyword "MAY" here creates a requirement on implementations. Use "may" instead.

        },
        "proof_type": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "validity (zkML) or fraud (opML)"
        }
    }
}
```

## Rationale

### Unique Token Identification

This specification sets the `tokenId` to be the hash of its corresponding `prompt`, creating a deterministic and collision-resistant way to associate tokens with their unique content generation parameters. This design decision ensures that the same prompt (which corresponds to the same AI-generated content under the same model seed) cannot be minted more than once, thereby preventing duplication and preserving the uniqueness of each NFT within the ecosystem.

### Generalization to Different Proof Types

This specification accommodates two proof types: validity proofs for zkML and fraud proofs for opML. Function arguments in `mint` and `verify` are designed for generality, allowing for compatibility with both proof systems. Moreover, the specification includes an updatable extension that specifically serves the requirements of opML.

### `verify` interface

> We specify a `verify` interface to enforce the correctness of `aigcData`. It is defined as a view function to reduce gas cost. `verify` SHOULD return true if and only if `aigcData` is finalized in both zkML and opML. In zkML, it MUST verify the ZK proof, i.e. `proof`; in opML, it MUST make sure that the challenging period is finalized, and that the `aigcData` is up-to-date, i.e. has been updated after finalization. Additionally, `proof` CAN be *empty* in opML.

Reviewer: Avoid using the uppercase keywords ("SHOULD") outside the Specification section, because they create requirements on implementations. If you're explaining something, just use "should" instead.

### `mint` interface

We specify a `mint` interface to bind the prompt and `aigcData` with `tokenId`. Notably, it acts differently in zkML and opML cases. In zkML, `mint` SHOULD make sure `verify` returns `true`. While in opML, it CAN be called before finalization. The consideration here is that, limited by the proving difficulty, zkML usually targets simple model inference tasks in practice, making it possible to provide a proof within an acceptable time frame. On the other hand, opML enables large model inference tasks, with a cost of longer confirmation time to achieve the approximate same security level. Mint until opML finalization may not be the best practice considering the existing optimistic protocols.

### Naming Choice on `update`

We adopt "update" over "finalize" because a successful challenge happens rarely in practice. Using `update` could avoid calling it for every `tokenId` and save gas.

### ML Model Publication

> While this standard does not describe the Machine Learning model publication stage, it is natural and recommended to publish the commitment of the Model to Ethereum separately, before any actual `mint` actions. The model commitment schema choice lies on the AIGC-NFT project issuer party. The commitment should be checked inside the implementation of the `verify` function.

Reviewer: > The commitment should be checked inside the implementation of the `verify` function.

This is definitely a recommendation for implementations, so needs to be in the Specification section.

## Reference Implementation

* ERC-7007 for [zkML](../assets/eip-7007/contracts/ERC7007Zkml.sol) and [opML](../assets/eip-7007/contracts/ERC7007Opml.sol)
* [ERC-7007 Enumerable Extension](../assets/eip-7007/contracts/ERC7007Enumerable.sol)

## Security Considerations

### Frontrunning Risk

> To address the risk of frontrunning, where an actor could potentially observe and preemptively claim a prompt during the minting process, implementers of [ERC-7007](./eip-7007.md) must incorporate a secure prompt-claiming mechanism. Implementations could include time-locks, commit-reveal schemes, or other anti-frontrunning techniques to ensure equitable and secured claim processes for AIGC-NFTs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address the risk of frontrunning, where an actor could potentially observe and preemptively claim a prompt during the minting process, implementers of this proposal must incorporate a secure prompt-claiming mechanism. Implementations could include time-locks, commit-reveal schemes, or other anti-frontrunning techniques to ensure equitable and secured claim processes for AIGC-NFTs.
```

### AIGC Data Change During Challenge Period

> In the opML scenario, it is important to consider that the `aigcData` might change during the challenge period due to disputes or updates. The updatable extension within ERC-7007 provides a way to handle these updates. Implementations must ensure that updates to `aigcData` are treated as critical state changes that require adherence to the same security and validation protocols as the initial minting process. Indexers should always check for any `Update` event emission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the opML scenario, it is important to consider that the `aigcData` might change during the challenge period due to disputes or updates. The updatable extension defined here provides a way to handle these updates. Implementations must ensure that updates to `aigcData` are treated as critical state changes that require adherence to the same security and validation protocols as the initial minting process. Indexers should always check for any `Update` event emission.
```
